Skip to main content
ReliefWeb

RW COVID-19 page: Find latest updates on global humanitarian responses

OCHA Services
Global Menu
Help	

Find help on how to use the site, read terms and conditions, view the FAQs and API documentation.

Log in / Register	

Access your account or create a new one for additional features or to post job or training opportunities.

Site Navigation
UPDATES

Latest humanitarian reports, maps and infographics and full document archive.

COUNTRIES

List of countries covered by ReliefWeb.

DISASTERS

List of alerts, ongoing and past disasters covered by ReliefWeb.

ORGANIZATIONS

List of organizations that are actively providing ReliefWeb with content.

TOPICS

Curated pages dedicated to humanitarian themes and specific humanitarian crises.

JOBS

Open job opportunities in the humanitarian field.

TRAINING

Open training opportunities in the humanitarian field.

SEARCH

Venezuela

Venezuela: Council adopts conclusions
Format
News and Press Release SourceEU  Posted29 May 2018 Originally published28 May 2018 OriginView original
Attachments
Download document
(PDF | 30.05 KB)

On 28 May 2018, the Council adopted the following conclusions on Venezuela:

The EU recalls its previous statements on Venezuela, in particular the High Representative's declaration on behalf of the EU of 22 May.

The latest developments in Venezuela have pushed further away the possibility of a constitutional negotiated solution that ensures the respect of democracy, the rule of law and human rights.

In spite of the numerous calls by national political actors and the international community, including the European Union, for elections on the basis of an agreed electoral calendar and guarantees that can ensure inclusive and credible elections, early presidential elections together with regional elections were held on 20 May without an agreement on the date or on the conditions, and in circumstances which did not allow for the participation of all political parties in an equal manner.

The substantially reduced electoral calendar, bans and other major obstacles to the participation of opposition political parties and their leaders, as well as the non-respect of minimal democratic standards as indicated by numerous reported irregularities, notably the widespread abuse of state resources, voter coercion and unbalanced access to media, led to these elections being neither free nor fair.

Under these circumstances, the election and its outcome lacked any credibility as the electoral process did not ensure the necessary guarantees for inclusive and democratic elections. The absence of those guarantees also prevented the EU from planning any form of observation to monitor the electoral process according to internationally recognized standards. The EU thus reiterates the need for free and transparent elections respecting the Constitutional rules of Venezuela.

Against this background, the EU calls for the holding of fresh presidential elections in accordance with internationally recognised democratic standards and the Venezuelan constitutional order. In this context, the EU will act swiftly, according to established procedures, with the aim of imposing additional targeted and reversible restrictive measures, that do not harm the Venezuelan population, whose plight the EU wishes to alleviate.

The EU reiterates the need for the recognition and respect of the role and independence of all democratically elected institutions, notably the National Assembly, the release of all political prisoners, the upholding of rule of law and human rights and fundamental freedoms.

The EU wishes to remain engaged with all stakeholders in Venezuela and reiterates its friendship and support to its people. The EU is ready to help find a democratic way out of the current multidimensional crisis, through a meaningful and result-oriented negotiation conducted in good faith, that includes all relevant Venezuelan political actors. To that end, the EU will enhance its diplomatic outreach with all relevant national, regional and international actors, recognising especially efforts by Latin American and Caribbean partners that have offered their assistance and support to the process of overcoming the crisis in Venezuela.

The EU is deeply concerned about the pressing humanitarian needs of the population, including of many Europeans citizens residing in the country, which need to be addressed urgently. The worsening crisis is causing mass migration that creates challenges to host communities and to regional stability. The EU calls on the Venezuelan Government to take immediate action to alleviate the impact of the crisis.

The European Union will continue and step up its support to the population of Venezuela, also in neighbouring countries, supporting the socio-economic inclusion of Venezuelans and resilience of host communities.

Primary country
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Source
European Union
Format
News and Press Release
Themes
Peacekeeping and PeacebuildingProtection and Human Rights
Language
English
Share
Share this on Facebook
Share this on Twitter
Post this on LinkedIn
Related Content

Venezuela

 Venezuela: el Consejo adopta Conclusiones
Format
News and Press Release Source EU  Posted 28 May 2018  Originally published 28 May 2018

Venezuela

 Venezuela’s complex humanitarian crisis: Humanitarian response, challenges for civil society
Format
Analysis Source WOLA  Posted 15 Sep 2021  Originally published 24 Nov 2020

Venezuela

 CIDH llama a un diálogo serio, amplio e inclusivo para la urgente reconstrucción de la institucionalidad democrática en Venezuela
Format
News and Press Release Source IACHR  Posted 23 Aug 2021  Originally published 23 Aug 2021

Venezuela + 1 more

 Amistades peligrosas: las guerrillas colombianas en la frontera venezolana
Format
News and Press Release Source ICG  Posted 30 Apr 2021  Originally published 28 Apr 2021
Additional links
BLOG

ReliefWeb's blog

LABS

ReliefWeb Labs projects explore new and emerging opportunities to improve information delivery to humanitarians.

ABOUT US

Learn more about ReliefWeb, leading online source for reliable and timely humanitarian information on global crises and disasters since 1996.

TERMS

ReliefWeb's terms & Conditions.

CONTACT

Contact us.

Social media
ReliefWeb on Facebook
ReliefWeb on Twitter
ReliefWeb on LinkedIn

Service provided by
UN OCHA

OCHA coordinates the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all.

ReliefWeb's Terms & Conditions.

© 2021 all rights reserved.
