We value your privacy

We and our partners store and/or access information on a device, such as cookies and process personal data, such as unique identifiers and standard information sent by a device for personalised ads and content, ad and content measurement, and audience insights, as well as to develop and improve products.

With your permission we and our partners may use precise geolocation data and identification through device scanning. You may click to consent to our and our partners’ processing as described above. Alternatively you may access more detailed information and change your preferences before consenting or to refuse consenting. Please note that some processing of your personal data may not require your consent, but you have a right to object to such processing. Your preferences will apply to a group of websites. You can change your preferences at any time by returning to this site or visit our privacy policy.

MORE OPTIONS
AGREE
ArticlePDF Available
Should the Voting Age be Lowered to 16 for UK Elections?
September 2015Political Insight 6(2)
DOI:10.1111/2041-9066.12097
Authors:
Jan Eichhorn
Andrew Mycock
University of Huddersfield
Download full-text PDF
Read full-text
Download citation
Copy link
Citations (8)
References (1)
Abstract
Lowering the voting age would increase youth engagement in politics, says Jan Eichhorn. A compelling case for extending the franchise to 16 and 17 year olds has yet to be made, writes Andrew Mycock.

Discover the world's research

20+ million members
135+ million publications
700k+ research projects
Join for free
Public Full-text 1
Content uploaded by Andrew Mycock
Author content
Content may be subject to copyright.
22 POLITICAL INSIGHT   •   SEPTEMBER 2015
Critics of lowering the franchise 
invoke a range of worries many 
people share: young people may 
not be informed enough, they 
will just follow their parents’ lead or simply 
not make use of the opportunity given. Our 
research of under-18 year olds during the 
Scottish independence referendum showed 
that these worries were unwarranted.
In a series of representative surveys, 
16-17 year olds showed similar interests to 
adults, used a great variety of information 
sources (not, as often wrongly asserted, only 
social media) and engaged in extensive 
discussions with family and friends. Over 40 
per cent held a dierent view to a parent 
and we actually found indications that 
young people inuenced their parents as 
well, which raises important doubts over 
claims that we always need to think of the 
parent-child relationship as a top-down one 
when it comes to political issues. We also 
found no evidence of inappropriate biasing 
eects for those young people who had 
discussed the referendum in class. 
Turnout amongst the 16-17 year olds was 
higher than for the 18-24 year olds, as the 
Electoral Commission found, which suggests 
we should rethink causality: often low voter 
engagement in young people is seen as a 
reason not to extent the franchise. But the 
opposite may be true, early enfranchisement 
may actually increase interest and 
engagement in the formative years of 
political socialisation. Our new cross-UK 
survey research (conducted in February 
2015) shows that after having experienced 
16-17 year olds participating in Scotland, it 
is now the only place in the UK where more 
people favour the extension of the franchise 
for all elections (50 per cent when don’t 
knows are excluded, compared to 30 per 
Debate
Lowering the voting age would increase youth engagement in politics, says Jan Eichhorn.
cent in England, 33 per cent in Wales and 34 
per cent in Northern Ireland). 
But critics may plausibly interject and say 
that the absence of negative eects does 
not suce to argue for a change in the law. 
We should also show that there would be 
likely positive eects of a reduced voting 
age. The Scottish referendum was a very 
special situation and several commentators 
questioned whether the positive 
observations from it could be sustained for 
young people when normal elections took 
place. 
Our new research strongly suggests that 
this was indeed the case. We surveyed over 
800 16-17 year olds, half in Scotland and half 
in the rest of the UK (rUK). This allowed us 
to compare whether there were any lasting 
dierences for young people in Scotland 
compared to peers elsewhere, and whether 
the same positive mechanisms as in the 
referendum could be observed. 
The dierences were substantial: of the 
16-17 year olds in Scotland, 67 per cent 
said they were very likely to vote (9-10 on a 
10-points scale) had they been allowed to in 
the 2015 General Election, compared to only 
39 per cent of rUK respondents. The young 
Scots were also more likely to have engaged 
in forms of non-electoral participation, 
such as petitions or demonstrations, (57 
per cent compared to 40 per cent in rUK). 
They also had recently used a greater variety 
of dierent information sources to get 
information about politics, and were much 
more likely to have discussed how the UK 
was governed with friends and family in the 
three months preceding the survey. 
All this suggests that the positive 
experience of early enfranchisement has 
lasted beyond the specic referendum 
context in Scotland. Crucially however, some 
of the dierence between Scotland and 
other parts of the UK can be explained by 
dierences in political education. A greater 
proportion of young people in Scotland had 
taken a ‘civics’-style course and more of them 
had discussed political issues in a classroom 
setting in the three months preceding 
the survey. Formal politics education 
was positively associated with a greater 
condence in understanding politics among 
respondents (something that discussions 
with parents in contrast did not achieve – 
suggesting again that young people engage 
and do not simply swallow what their 
parents tell them on politics). 
The most consistent factor that was 
associated with higher levels of political 
engagement and positive civic attitudes 
were discussions of politics in the classroom. 
Early enfranchisement at 16 can be a unique 
experience, because it could mean that a 
structured process of engaging with politics 
accompanied one’s rst vote. 
While the positive experience in Scotland 
is still relatively new, it mirrors ndings 
from Austria, where the voting age was 
lowered to 16 in 2007 for all elections and 
accompanied with a curriculum reform that 
placed greater emphasis on politics in all 
schools. The eects observed are similar to 
those described here – and they have been 
lasting. If we want a similar increase in youth 
engagement and pro-civic attitudes, we 
should embrace the lowering of the voting 
age and qualied political education in all 
schools.
References
Eichhorn, J., Paterson, L., MacInnes, J. and M. Rosie. 
2013/2014. Young people’s attitudes on Scottish Independ-
ence. Project ndings available at: https://www.aqmen.
ac.uk/referendum/youngpeople 
Jan Eichhorn is Chancellor's Fellow in 
Social Policy at the University of Edinburgh.
SEPTEMBER 2015   •   POLITICAL INSIGHT 23
One of the unexpected outcomes 
of the Conservative party victory 
in the 2015 General Election, and 
their determination to hold a 
referendum on the UK’s membership of the 
European Union, has been the re-energisation 
of debates about lowering the voting age. 
Deliberation about the terms of franchise 
for the forthcoming EU referendum has 
oered another opportunity for ‘votes at 16’ 
supporters to rehearse two well-established 
arguments in support of their cause. 
The rst is that 16 and 17 year olds are 
suciently political literate, engaged and 
mature to be granted requisite political 
rights. Proponents believe the case for a 
universal lowering of the voting age has 
been strengthened by the extension of 
the franchise to 16 and 17 year olds in last 
year’s Scottish independence referendum. 
The research by the University of Edinburgh 
indicates that many temporarily-enfranchised 
Scots exercised their new democratic rights 
in an engaged, informed and independently-
minded manner. They conclude that earlier 
enfranchisement, together with ‘civics-style’ 
education in schools, has had a signicant 
impact on youth political socialisation in 
Scotland, meaning young Scots are now more 
likely to participate in future elections than 
their dis-enfranchised peers in England. 
It is not surprising that young Scots are 
more politically energised when compared 
to their peers across the rest of the UK after 
experiencing a referendum campaign that 
dominated Scottish public life so manifestly. 
But while the Edinburgh study is important 
in identifying some positive outcomes of the 
inclusion of younger voters in the referendum, 
it does not provide sucient longitudinal 
evidence required to support universal age-
based franchise reform across the UK. 
Should the Voting Age be 
Lowered to 16 for UK Elections?
A compelling case for extending the franchise to 16 and 17 year olds has yet to be made, writes Andrew Mycock.
Indeed, there is a need to challenge the 
proposition that the Scottish independence 
referendum was a wholly positive experience. 
The often febrile and divisive nature of 
the debate may have actually schooled 
younger citizens in a form of binary politics 
that is deeply adversarial and reductive. It is 
unclear whether young Scots are continuing 
to ght the independence campaign or 
have established a deeper commitment to 
traditional democratic politics – be it Scottish 
or British. The 2015 General Election result, in 
which the SNP took 50 per cent of the vote, 
indicates that Scottish politics remains deeply 
binary. 
Questions must also be raised regarding 
the positive impact of the independence 
referendum on youth political literacy in 
Scotland. Discussion of the referendum in 
schools was bespoke and variable in terms 
of quality and quantity, this reecting the 
‘whole-school’ rather than dedicated provision 
of citizenship education within the Scottish 
curriculum. Furthermore, the discussion of 
politics as part of ’civics-style’ lessons such as 
Modern Studies were available only to the 
third of young Scots referendum voters who 
took the subject. 
‘Civics’ approaches to citizenship education 
promote a narrow conception of political 
citizenship, where voting is seen the critical 
element of participation. This is an outdated 
approach that fails to embrace the seismic 
changes in how young people understand 
and ‘do’ politics. The need for young citizens 
in Scotland and the rest of the UK to develop 
comprehensive opportunities to gain 
experience of banal political participation in 
their schools and local communities before 
they are given the vote is often overlooked by 
‘votes at 16’ proponents. 
The second argument in favour of 
lowering the franchise draws attention to 
the substantial range of economic and social 
rights and responsibilities also realised at 16 
years of age, such as paying tax, consensual 
sex and marriage, and military service, which, 
it is argued, should be complemented with 
the right to vote. However, proponents oer 
a simplistic and reductive view of its potential 
impact on political citizenship, without giving 
consideration to how the broader economic 
and social rights and responsibilities of youth 
and adult citizenship are realised and correlated. 
Moreover, they fail to address thorny questions 
such as should the age of candidacy or jury 
service be lowered to 16 too. 
The decision to lower the voting age to 18 in 
1969 was informed by an acknowledgement 
of the transformation in how British society 
understood the rights and responsibilities of 
young citizens. This is not the case in 2015. 
The potential for creating a ‘two-tier’ electoral 
franchise, whereby under-18 year old voters 
are treated as ‘second class’ citizens and who 
increasingly resent older and more empowered 
citizens is considerable. While an absolute 
synchronisation is unlikely, there is a need to 
consider the question of voting age within a 
broader debate about the age-related rights 
and responsibilities of citizenship.
The voting age in 26 out of the 27 EU 
member states remains at 18. This is not an 
accidental coincidence and tells us much 
about how youth and adult citizenship is 
understood across Europe. But although they 
failed to revise the EU Referendum Bill to 
expand the franchise to include 16 and 17 year 
olds, momentum appears at present to be with 
supporters of ‘votes at 16’. Nevertheless, adult 
public opinion on the issue suggests a majority 
still oppose lowing the voting age. Questions 
persist regarding the arguments oered in 
support of voting age reform, which indicate 
the case for lowering voting age has not yet 
been convincingly made. 
Andrew Mycock is a Reader in politics at the 
University of Hudderseld. 
Citations (8)
References (1)
... Reform of the voting age has been implemented, to varying degrees, in only a few European and South American countries or regions, such as Austria, Scotland, Norway, Estonia, Germany, Argentina, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, Malta, and Nicaragua. But given the lack of clear evidence on the positive effects of such a reform, many countries like Canada and the UK are still weighing the value of this institutional change (Canada, 2016;Eichhorn and Mycock, 2015;United Kingdom, 2003). Proponents of this reform argue that allowing the 16and 17-year-olds to vote for the first time while they are still in school and living at home with their parents could have long-term positive effects on turnout (Bergh, 2013;Franklin, 2004;Zeglovits, 2013). ...
... However, we find that the influence of schools is nonexistent. These null results on school influence may reflect the fact that we only have one indicator-taking part in a debate activity at school-and that we do not consider the potential value of civics classes, nor the quality of discussions and the types of messages conveyed by teachers (Dalton, 2008;Eichhorn and Mycock, 2015;Quintelier, 2007). Finally, we find no evidence of a more supportive role of parents and schools for the development of political resources and engagement of underage youth than for adult youth. ...
Lowering the Voting Age to 16? A Comparative Study on the Political Competence and Engagement of Underage and Adult Youth
Article
Apr 2020CAN J POLIT SCI
Valérie-Anne MahéoÉric Bélanger
View
Show abstract
... This oversight may well be intentional. The Scottish National Party-led Scottish Government lowered the voting age to 16 for the 2014 Scottish independence referendum hoping that it would enfranchise young people who were thought more likely to support their cause (Mycock, 2015). Policy learning in Scotland has thus been constrained and has seen a replication of some of the policy effects associated with 'Votes-at-18'. ...
The lessons of 1969: policy learning, policy memory and voting age reform
Article
Full-text available
Sep 2021Br Polit
Andrew Mycock
Thomas Loughran
Jon Tonge
View
Show abstract
... In Scotland, the 2014 independence referendum saw an exceptional turnout of 75% of under-18s, who voted in significantly larger numbers when compared with the 54% of 18-24-year olds (Electoral Commission, 2015). Research has highlighted that 16-and 17-year-old voters were as politically engaged, literate, and autonomous in their participation as older voters during the referendum (Eichhorn, 2015;Hill, Lockyer, Head, & McDonald 2017). Voting age reform in Scotland has had a marked positive effect on youth political interest and activism when compared with young people in the rest of the UK McLaverty, Baxter, Tait, Göker, & Heron, 2015). ...
Modernizing Voting in a Post-transition Country: The Estonian Experience of Lowering the Voting Age
Chapter
Jan 2020
Anu Toots
Tõnu Idnurm
View
Show abstract
Political interest, recognition and acceptance of voting responsibility, and electoral participation: young people’s perspective
Article
Apr 2021J Youth Stud
Maria BorgAndrew Azzopardi
View
Show abstract
Young People, Voter Registration, Voting, Elections and Referendums
Chapter
Jun 2019
Sarah Pickard
View
Show abstract
Understanding the Policy Drivers and Effects of Voting Age Reform
Chapter
Jan 2020
Andrew Mycock
Thomas Loughran
Jon Tonge
View
Show abstract
Votes at 16 in Scotland: Political Experiences Beyond the Vote Itself
Chapter
Jan 2020
Christine HuebnerJan Eichhorn
View
Show abstract
Should 16- and 17-Year Olds Be Given the Right to Vote?
Chapter
Nov 2017
Jacqueline Briggs
View
Show abstract
Recommendations
Discover more
Project
The Greater Manchester Youth Assembly
Andrew Mycock
To establish a regional youth parliament in Greater Manchester and assess the impact of local-regional devolution on youth citizenship and identity
View project
Project
Jean Monnet Network on Citizenship Education and European Values
Chris G Gifford
Andrew Mycock
Beata Rynkiewicz
Our Network proposes to bring together experts from 28 institutions from across 19 European countries concerned with and committed to developing all children’s and young people’s active citizenship ... [more]
View project
Article
Full-text available
Rocking the Vote and More: An Experimental Study of the Impact of Youth Political Portals
August 2008 · Journal of Information Technology & Politics
Michael A. XenosKyurim Kyoung
This study provides a controlled test of the effects of youth-oriented political portals. Based on existing theories of the individual effects of Internet use, we hypothesize that these sites may facilitate political engagement among members of their target audience in a variety of ways, but we also consider the possibility that such effects may be moderated by prior levels of political interest. ... [Show full abstract]
View full-text
Chapter
Deducing Preferences and Choices in the 1980 Presidential Election
January 2007
Steven BramsPeter C. Fishburn
It is appropriate, we think, to conclude this book by analyzing, as of this writing (June 1982), the most recent presidential election. Fortuitously, included in this election was the most significant independent or third-party candidate since George Wallace in 1968, whose impact on the 1968 race we assessed in Section 8.3. As we shall show, the outcome of the 1980 race would not have changed ... [Show full abstract]
Read more
Article
The Kennedy-Nixon debates
December 2000
M Schudson
"More adults watched the TV debate than would vote on Election Day," writes a communication scholar. "Critics nonwithstanding, the Kennedy-Nixon debates were a fine moment for American public life.".
Read more
Chapter
Suffrage and Elections
January 1983
Jens Alber
Richard C. EichenbergJürgen Kohl[...]Kurt Seebohm
This chapter presents four kinds of information: qualitative data concerning suffrage requirements and voting procedures; and quantitative data covering the extension of the franchise, electoral turnout, and distribution of votes according to party.
Read more
	
or
	Discover by subject area
Recruit researchers
Join for free
Login
Company
About us
News
Careers
Support
Help Center
Business solutions
Advertising
Recruiting
© 2008-2021 ResearchGate GmbH. All rights reserved.
TermsPrivacyCopyrightImprint
