Daily Advent Nigeria
Home
 
Politics
 
BBNaija
 
Sports
 
Entertainment
 
Accident
 
Soccer
 
Business
 
Crime
 
Religion
HomeUncategorized2018September1Demerits of Social Media in our society
DEMERITS OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN OUR SOCIETY
Posted On: September 1, 2018 12:28 Pm WAT Posted By: Sejal Comments: 0

Social media has grown tremendously in the last few years. From 2006 onwards the growth rate is unexpectedly very high. Specially Facebook and Twitter have grown much faster and captured millions of users in just a few years. The way technology is growing, it is obvious that more and more people are going to grasp its benefits. It has brought a lot of advantages for the society. From progressed nations to under-developed countries, every nation is utilizing the power of social media to enhance life and use it for the bitterness of the people.

However, on the other hand it has also affected the society in the negative way. Just like anything which can be used for both good and bad, social media have also provided the negative and positive ways for the people. It is all about the usage and getting things done positively by using the power of social media. It is in the hands of the user to use to its advantage. But willingly or unwillingly it can still have negative impacts on the users. Today in this article I am going to discuss both the advantages of the social media for the society.

1. Cyberbullying

Most of the children have become victims of the cyberbulling over the past. Since anyone can create a fake account and do anything without being traced, it has become quite easy for anyone to bully on the Internet. Threats, intimidation messages and rumors can be sent to the masses to create discomfort and chaos in the society.

2. Hacking

Personal data and privacy can easily be hacked and shared on the Internet. Which can make financial losses and loss to personal life. Similarly, identity theft is another issue that can give financial losses to anyone by hacking their personal accounts. Several personal twitter and Facebook accounts have been hacked in the past and the hacker had posted materials that have affected the individuals personal lives.  This is one of the dangerous disadvantages of the social media and every user is advised to keep their personal data and accounts safe to avoid such accidents.

3. Addiction

The addictive part of the social media is very bad and can disturb personal lives as well. The teenagers are the most affected by the addiction of the social media. They get involved very extensively and are eventually cut off from the society. It can also waste individual time that could have been utilized by productive tasks and activities.

4. Fraud and Scams

Several examples are available where individuals have scammed and commit fraud through the social media.

5. Security Issues 

Now a day’s security agencies have access to people personal accounts. Which makes the privacy almost compromised. You never know when you are visited by any investigation officer regarding any issue that you mistakenly or unknowingly discussed over the internet.

 

6. Reputation

Social media can easily ruin someone’s reputation just by creating a false story and spreading across the social media. Similarly businesses can also suffer losses due to bad reputation being conveyed over the social media.

7. Cheating and Relationship Issues

Most of the people have used the social media platform to propose and marry each other. However, after some time they turn to be wrong in their decision and part ways. Similarly, couples have cheated each other by showing the fake feelings and incorrect information.

8. Health Issues

The excess usage of social media can also have a negative impact on the health. Since exercise is the key to lose weight, most of the people get lazy because of the excessive use of social networking sites. Which in result brings disorder in the routine life.

9. Social Media causes death

Not just by using it, but by following the stunts and other crazy stuffs that are shared on the internet. For example bikers doing the unnecessary stunts, people doing the jump over the trains and other life threatening stuffs.

10. Glamorizes Drugs and Alcohol

One of the disadvantages of the social media is that people start to follow others who are wealthy or drug addicted and share their views and videos on the web. Which eventually inspires others to follow the same and get addicted to the drugs and alcohol.

FacebookSocial MediaWhatsApp
Post navigation
Prev Post
Next Post
SEARCH
ADS
RECENT POSTS
TOP NEWS TONIGHT
At Least 14 Dead As Police Fire Teargas At Lekki Tollgate Protesters
21 People Survive Plane Crash, Police Raid Sex Party [PHOTOS]
BREAKING NEWS TONIGHT
33 Nigerians Dead, INEC To Ban Women With Make-Up From Voting
LINKS
Opera News Nigeria Site
COMPLAINTS AND SUGGESTIONS

Please send an email to
wpzerorz+dailyadvent.com@gmail.com

Daily Advent Nigeria by Everestthemes
