Skip to main content
Sections
Search
More
Podcasts
Newsletters
METRO
Obituaries
Death Notices
Globe Local
Politics
Investigations
Education
Newton
New England
Weather
SPORTS
Red Sox
Patriots
Bruins
Celtics
Revolution
Colleges
High Schools
TV & Radio
BUSINESS
Healthcare
Biotech
Technology
Real Estate
Economy
Bold Types
Top Places To Work 2020
OPINION
The Emancipator
Ideas
Columns
Editorials
Letters
Cartoons
SPOTLIGHT
POLITICS
RHODE ISLAND
NATION
WORLD
LIFESTYLE
Food & Dining
Comics
Crossword
Travel
Names
Real Estate
MARIJUANA
ARTS
Books
Movies
Music
Television
Visual Arts
Theater/Dance
CARS
REAL ESTATE
EVENTS
METROSPORTSBUSINESSTECHNOLOGYOPINIONCORONAVIRUSSPOTLIGHTRHODE ISLANDPOLITICSEDUCATIONLIFESTYLEARTSGLOBE MAGAZINECARSREAL ESTATEEVENTS
SIGN IN
ONE DAY SALE
$1 for 6 months
THE ARGUMENT
Should Election Day be a national holiday?
Updated July 25, 2019, 6:02 p.m.
9

YES

Cheryl Bible

Acton resident; member of Indivisible Massachusetts, a political advocacy group

Read full article

Maximum participation. Isn’t that what democracy looks like?

In America we should be honoring our democracy and doing everything possible to make it easier to participate. Election Days should be holidays so that everyone has the opportunity to vote.

We should not be satisfied with a “democracy” in which large numbers of our people don’t vote.

In the 2016 presidential election, 61.4 percent of those eligible voted. In midterm elections, turnout was just 41.9 percent in 2014, though rising to 53.4 percent in 2018. According to one survey, 35 percent of those not voting in 2014 said they didn’t because of work or school conflicts. Another poll found that nearly two-thirds of Americans would support an election holiday.

Advertisement

Our current voting day was established in 1845 to accommodate agrarian and church-going voters. The day was often a time for political events, celebrations, bands, and barbeques. The date was chosen to suit the era.

House Democrats have proposed a national election holiday, along with other voter access options, in the “For The People Act.”

The idea of a national holiday is also gaining popularity among 2020 Democratic presidential candidates, including US Senator Elizabeth Warren.

Can even local actions help build momentum and public support for a national holiday?

Sandusky, Ohio recently replaced its Columbus Day with an election day holiday. Boston’s City Council is currently exploring making election day a holiday in the city.

There are various options to explore, from designating the current Election Day a national holiday to making Veterans Day also Election Day.

Additional voter access efforts include early voting, allowing people to vote absentee without an excuse, same day registration, and mail-in voting. These are available in various states but not consistently across the country.

Advertisement

An election day holiday would offer citizens dropped from voter rolls for voter suppression purposes and honest errors a chance to go to their local election office, correct the problem, and cast their ballot. Voters faced with ridiculously long waiting lines would have the option of returning later in the day. Voters with difficulties connecting with assigned voting locations could address that obstacle.

Isn’t this what Democracy looks like?

NO

Dennis J. Galvin

Westford resident; Republican State Committee member

The proposal to make our national election a federal holiday is one of several advanced at the state and national levels in recent years purportedly to make voting easier. Others include automatic voter registration, early voting, and same day voter registration. While it would be nice to think these efforts are being driven by civic-mindedness, the safer bet is to assume that politics are behind it. Most of these are really intended to help Democratic candidates.

The anger and frustration many Democrats continue to vent over their loss in the 2016 election is not all due to President Donald Trump’s abrasive personality. Some of it appears directed at the relatively low voter turn-out in that consequential election: 61.4 percent of Americans voted that year, below the 63.6 percent who voted in the 2008 election that gave President Obama his historic victory. The black vote, which Democrats historically rely upon, was only 59.6 percent in 2016.

The outcome suggests key elements of the Democratic coalition were not enthused enough about their candidates to come out and vote for them.

Advertisement

Yet rather than reviewing their platform and candidates to see how they could become more competitive, Democrats have embarked upon a strategy of doing everything short of paying people to come to the polls to increase their turnout. There are today no significant impediments to voting. Nationwide, polls are open throughout the day for anyone who wants to participate.. Absentee and early voting are now well-established practices.

The problem is that Democratic voters in 2016 either didn’t like their choices or were simply not interested in voting. Democrats can at least take solace that many of those voters did not go to the polls and vote Republican.

The movement to make our national election a federal holiday is a gimmick Democrats and their supporters believe will increase turnout of their base. Their plan, however, would require the American people to pay for its implementation through lost business and wages. Making Election Day a national holiday is simply not necessary, and would more than likely not affect turnout. People who vote will vote; people who don’t, will simply sleep in.

This is an informal poll, not a scientific survey. Please vote only once.

Should Election Day be a national holiday?
Yes
No
Vote
View Results


As told to Globe correspondent John Laidler. To suggest a topic, please contact laidler@globe.com.

Black News Hour presented by The Boston Globe
Run by Black journalists at The Boston Globe, “Black News Hour,” a new radio program, delivers reliable news that connects with our community and expands on deeper issues impacting our city.
BOSTON GLOBE VIDEO
12 hours at Mass. and Cass
SHARE

0:26

While the politicians debate, the daily morbid rhythms of Mass. and Cass roll on. (Photos by Craig F. Walker/Globe Staff, Audio reporting by Scott Helman/Globe Staff)
NOW PLAYING
12 hours at Mass. and Cass
Rare footage of the 1929 Boston Marathon
Pawtucket police chief ordered officers to stop retired cop after he caught her running errands


MOST POPULAR ON BOSTONGLOBE.COM
A storage company auctioned everything that belonged to an Air Force sergeant while he was deployed overseas
The case of the Martha’s Vineyard heiress and the Florida psychic who took her for millions
Child care is costly everywhere. But in Massachusetts, it’s ‘particularly bad.’ Here’s why
Mojo, once in deep supply, is suddenly gone as Red Sox head to Houston in a 3-2 hole in the ALCS
There are $29 billion in unredeemed US savings bonds. Congress wants to make it easier to find if any of that money is yours — and then get it
Annissa Essaibi George’s risky gambit
MIT professor sues after he was forced to resign from institute following sexual harassment allegations
Here’s what to know about Dave Chappelle’s ‘The Closer’ and the controversy it has ignited
Retooled Celtics look a lot like last year’s inconsistent Celtics in season-opening loss to Knicks
Kids age 5 to 11 could soon be able to get COVID-19 vaccine; FDA approves mixing shots for boosters


VIEWS FROM OUR COLUMNISTS
YVONNE ABRAHAM
Annissa Essaibi George’s risky gambit
JENEÉ OSTERHELDT
As the MFA’s new fashion curator, theo tyson plans to undress sartorial truths and address the community
ADRIAN WALKER
Is the Boston mayor’s race over?
SHIRLEY LEUNG
‘Living in a tent is not an option.’ Those are the words we needed to hear from Boston City Hall
THOMAS FARRAGHER
For Salem’s ghosts and witches, goblins and ghouls, vaccinations are the most coveted treats
KEVIN CULLEN
In Vermont, mud season comes early
DAN MCGOWAN
Can Secretary of State Gorbea make communities care about cybersecurity?
MORE ON GLOBE.COM
A storage company auctioned everything that belonged to an Air Force sergeant while he was deployed overseas
From furniture and appliances to family heirlooms and irreplaceable keepsakes, Air Force Technical Sergeant Charles Cornacchio's belongings were auctioned off by the storage company five months after he was deployed.
GLOBE MAGAZINE
The case of the Martha’s Vineyard heiress and the Florida psychic who took her for millions
Vera Pratt moved to the island at age 70 hoping to find many years of happiness. Then she met “Psychic Angela” and her future got a whole lot more complicated.
Child care is costly everywhere. But in Massachusetts, it’s ‘particularly bad.’ Here’s why
Infant care in Massachusetts is easily more expensive than in-state tuition at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and is about 30 percent more than average rent in the state, according to one estimate.
DAN SHAUGHNESSY
Mojo, once in deep supply, is suddenly gone as Red Sox head to Houston in a 3-2 hole in the ALCS
The Sox were outscored, 18-3, in Games 4-5 at Fenway Park.
There are $29 billion in unredeemed US savings bonds. Congress wants to make it easier to find if any of that money is yours — and then get it
The humble paper savings bond, which helped finance World War II and for decades provided risk-free investments for average Americans, has become so forgotten that the Treasury Department says 80 million of them, worth a total of $29 billion, have fully matured but have not been redeemed.
Annissa Essaibi George’s risky gambit
Running behind in the polls, Boston mayoral candidate Annissa Essaibi George has opted for a scorched-earth strategy. But who gets burned?
MIT professor sues after he was forced to resign from institute following sexual harassment allegations
Dr. David Sabatini says he had a consensual sexual relationship with his accuser, who worked with him at MIT’s Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, according to the suit filed Wednesday.
Here’s what to know about Dave Chappelle’s ‘The Closer’ and the controversy it has ignited
Comedian Dave Chappelle’s comments on transgender people in his new Netflix special “The Closer” have set off a wave of criticism, some of it from inside the streaming company. Here’s a look at the controversy, and how executives, employees, and Chappelle himself are responding.
THE GREAT DIVIDE
Rafaela Polanco is the first Boston School Committee member who doesn’t speak fluent English. Here’s how she’s filling communication gaps for countless families
“I thought advocating for my child’s school would make me vulnerable,” Rafaela Polanco said. “But then I did it. And nothing happened to me ... so I kept going.”
MOST READ IN THIS SECTION
A storage company auctioned everything that belonged to an Air Force sergeant while he was deployed overseas
Child care is costly everywhere. But in Massachusetts, it’s ‘particularly bad.’ Here’s why
Annissa Essaibi George’s risky gambit
MIT professor sues after he was forced to resign from institute following sexual harassment allegations
Fact checking the second Boston mayoral debate between Michelle Wu and Annissa Essaibi George
THE GREAT DIVIDE
Rafaela Polanco is the first Boston School Committee member who doesn’t speak fluent English. Here’s how she’s filling communication gaps for countless families
CORONAVIRUS LIVE UPDATES
Kids age 5 to 11 could soon be able to get COVID-19 vaccine; FDA approves mixing shots for boosters
FORECAST
Is Thursday the last really warm day this fall?
Amherst College to end legacy admissions advantage for children of alumni
FOLLOW US
SUBSCRIBE NOW

Digital Access

Home Delivery

Gift Subscriptions

MY ACCOUNT

Log In

Manage My Account

Customer Service

CONTACT

Help & FAQs

Globe Newsroom

Advertise

MORE

Newsletters 

View The EPaper 

Order Back Issues 

News In Education 

Search The Archives 

Privacy Policy 

Terms Of Service 

Terms Of Purchase 

Work At Boston Globe Media 

Do Not Sell My Personal Information

©2021 Boston Globe Media Partners, LLC
YOU'VE BEEN
SELECTED
Only $1 for 6 months
Special offer just for you. Only $1 for unlimited access.
Get access now
Already a subscriber? Log in | Home
