Discover Thomson Reuters

Directory of sites
Login
Contact
Support
World
Business
Markets
Breakingviews
Video

More

EVERYTHINGNEWS
SEPTEMBER 30, 20196:58 PMUPDATED 2 YEARS AGO
Italy's ruling parties call for lowering voting age to 16

By Reuters Staff

2 MIN READ

ROME (Reuters) - Italy’s coalition parties said on Monday they were in favor of reducing the minimum voting age to 16, in a move which analysts said would increase the electorate by about 1 million people.

FILE PHOTO: A man casts his vote at a polling station in Milan, Italy March 4, 2018. REUTERS/Stefano Rellandini

Italy would be the second EU country after Austria to lower the minimum age to participate in national elections below 18, according to the U.S. CIA’s “World Factbook”.

Former Prime Minister Enrico Letta triggered the debate on Monday when he called for the voting age to be immediately lowered after young people flooded the streets of cities around the world to demand political action to counter climate change.

“It is a way to tell those young people ... that we take them seriously,” Letta, an academic and member of the co-ruling Democratic Party (PD), told daily newspaper la Repubblica.

Currently Italians have to be 18 to elect representatives to the lower house of parliament and be 25 to vote in elections for the upper house, the Senate.

His call was supported by PD chief Nicola Zingaretti and Luigi Di Maio, the leader of the other governing party, the anti-establishment 5-Star Movement.

“Young people should be respected, listened to and put at the center of politics,” Di Maio wrote on Facebook.

Several EU countries, including Germany and Scotland, allow 16-year-olds to vote in local elections, but Italy would be the first large European state to allow it in parliamentary elections.

In Hungary, people can vote from age 16 if they are married, otherwise they have to wait until 18.

Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte, a technocrat close to 5-Star, welcomed the proposal and said it was now up to parliament to table a bill on the reform.

“We still haven’t started discussing it in the government but we could do,” he said in an interview on Facebook.

Lorenzo Pregliasco, head of polling and political analysis firm YouTrend, said 16- and 17-year-olds would make up some 2% of the electorate, or just over 1 million out of 50 million eligible voters.

Reporting by Angelo Amante; Editing by Giles Elgood

Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.

TRENDING STORIES

Exclusive-Dutch forensic lab says it has decoded Tesla's driving data

U.S. weekly jobless claims hit 19-month low; labor market recovery gains traction

Tesla beats quarterly revenue estimates

Stocks stall, oil cools, Evergrande and lira mauled

U.S. surgeons successfully test pig kidney transplant in human patient
AppsNewslettersAdvertise with UsAdvertising GuidelinesCookiesTerms of UsePrivacyDo Not Sell My Personal Information

All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.

© 2021 Reuters. All Rights Reserved.
European Union Individuals

Right to Withdraw Consent under GDPR

If you are an individual located in the E.U. you have the right, at any time, to withdraw your consent if you previously provided a controller with your consent to process your personal data. If you previously provided your consent to allow cookies on your browser, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. You may withdraw your consent to our use of non-strictly necessary cookies through Reuters.com by clicking on the “Show Purpose” button below. However, if you disable the use of cookies in your browser, it may impact your experience of the site.

Please also note that withdrawing your consent may not mean you will stop seeing advertisements, and that you cannot opt-out of strictly necessary cookies that are required. For more information about your rights as an individual located in the European Union, please see our Privacy Statement.

Information Our Partners Collect

We want to be transparent about the data our partners collect and how we use it, so you can best exercise control over your personal information. We use the following partners on Reuters.com. In accordance with our Privacy Statement, they may use cookies and other mechanisms to, among other things, connect you with your social networks and tailor advertising to better match your interests. You can elect to opt-out of this information collection by clicking here

We process your data to deliver content or advertisements and measure the delivery of such content or advertisements to extract insights about our website. We share this information with our partners on the basis of consent and legitimate interest. You may exercise your right to consent or object to a legitimate interest, based on a specific purpose below or at a partner level in the link under each purpose. These choices will be signaled to our vendors participating in the Transparency and Consent Framework.

Allow All
Manage Consent Preferences
Strictly Necessary Cookies
Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms.    You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Ensure security, prevent fraud, and debug

Your data can be used to monitor for and prevent fraudulent activity, and ensure systems and processes work properly and securely.

Technically deliver ads or content

Your device can receive and send information that allows you to see and interact with ads and content.

Receive and use automatically-sent device characteristics for identification

Your device might be distinguished from other devices based on information it automatically sends, such as IP address or browser type.

Link different devices

Different devices can be determined as belonging to you or your household in support of one or more of purposes.

Match and combine offline data sources

Data from offline data sources can be combined with your online activity in support of one or more purposes

List of IAB Vendors‎
 | View Full Legal Text 
Opens in a new window
Sale of Personal Data

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites.    They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages.    If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Performance Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.    All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Store and/or access information on a device

Cookies, device identifiers, or other information can be stored or accessed on your device for the purposes presented to you.

Actively scan device characteristics for identification

Your device can be identified based on a scan of your device's unique combination of characteristics.

Use precise geolocation data

Your precise geolocation data can be used in support of one or more purposes. This means your location can be accurate to within several meters.

List of IAB Vendors‎
 | View Full Legal Text 
Opens in a new window
Personalised ads and content, ad and content measurement, audience insights and product development
Develop and improve products

Your data can be used to improve existing systems and software, and to develop new products

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Create a personalised ads profile

A profile can be built about you and your interests to show you personalised ads that are relevant to you.

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Select personalised ads

Personalised ads can be shown to you based on a profile about you.

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Create a personalised content profile

A profile can be built about you and your interests to show you personalised content that is relevant to you.

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Select personalised content

Personalised content can be shown to you based on a profile about you.

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Measure content performance

The performance and effectiveness of content that you see or interact with can be measured.

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Apply market research to generate audience insights

Market research can be used to learn more about the audiences who visit sites/apps and view ads.

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Select basic ads

Ads can be shown to you based on the content you’re viewing, the app you’re using, your approximate location, or your device type.

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Measure ad performance

The performance and effectiveness of ads that you see or interact with can be measured.

OBJECT TO LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
List of IAB Vendors‎
 | View Full Legal Text 
Opens in a new window
Reject All
Confirm My Choices
