866.642.4556
Client Login
Novofex.com
Business Development, Innovative Solutions
WHO WE ARE
WHAT WE DO
HOW WE HELP
RESOURCES
WHY CHOOSE US
LET’S TALK
Are Social Networks Making Us ANTI-Social?
	
You are here:
HomeSocial Media
August 5, 20140 CommentsSocial MediaBy Karl

You hear it all the time – we are attached to our smartphones.We are constantly checking them, and never have them more than an arm’s reach away from us. During the day, we take them everywhere (yes, including the bathroom), and at nighttime, we  plug them in to charge right next to our bed!  Sure, we may be playing a cool game or browsing the web on them at times, but there is one key reason why we are so seriously attached to our devices – social networks.

The Past few years, in fact, we have grown more and more attached to our smartphones- but let’s let the numbers tell the tale:

 

Wait, How Did This Happen?

With the dawn of such social networks like Xanga and Myspace, our generation thought we had become the most social generation to date – sharing information, uploading pictures, and letting the whole world know of our travels and plans.  With the dawn of the smartphone and the rise of mobile computing, updating our social network activity on the go became easier than ever. Such networks like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram have only fed our social networking addiction.  For many of us, our smartphone has become more important than our home, car, or even firstborn child! For some strange reason, we are compelled to make a post about every little thing in our life – including posts about what we are having for lunch!

But are these Social Networks hindering our human interactions?

Millennials may not be so willing to admit this, but all you need to do it take a look around  you!  This might be something that you may not realize yourself, but then again, maybe it is because you too are so busy on your smartphone, just as everyone else is!

Checkout this All to Common Scene:

 

You know the scenario – boy likes girl, and boy asks girl out on a date.  The two arrive at the date location, and then they both proceed to pull out…their smartphones.  Yep, this is the way the new generation is dating.  It seems we would rather text or message each other when directly across from one another, instead of opening our mouths and initiating a conversation.

Well Stated, Meme.
Does This Scene Look Familiar?

Did you really think this was limited to a two person set?  I can see how one could try to hide indirectly behind their phones during a first date because they may be nervous, but the above photo shows that is not the case.  Even in larger groups, us humans are literally glued to our smartphones!

But Wait, Theres More!

Yes, you are correct – The Older Generation is now doing this too! So this is not just limited to younger individuals of Generations Millennial and Y- Everyone is posting!  All Day, Every Day!  It really seems that we are completely consumed by our social network accounts.  Why, just the other day Facebook’s servers went down, and not only was it classified by the mainstream media as “Breaking News”, but people were actually calling 911 to report it.  Yes, 911.  What have we as an intelligent species come to?

But Let’s Get Back to Our Central Question..

Are Social Networks really making us more social? While we seem to have a serious addiction to them, this debate can arguably go both ways.  Yes, we are more social in a digital sense, but what is all of this digital social-ness without being able to socialze in the real world?  We humans are naturally a social species, and we crave attention as if our survival depended on it  This is why so many people who may not have been the popular kids in school have flocked to social media to make their impact!  But at the end of the day, do we really want to be secluded in our own little bubbles with only our smartphones to bridge personal connections for us?  Rather, why not eliminate the smartphones and social networks from the mix entirely, and directly bond and communicate with other human beings in person?  Call me old fasioned, but it seems that in today’s day and age, even the phone call has become outdated.  Nonetheless, I leave the ultimate decision in this debate for you to answer.

About the author

Karl

Technology lover, friend to all geeks alike!

Related posts
	The Visual Consumer Journey/ Pinterest and Other Social Media
April 26, 2016
	Prince dies, social media explodes
April 22, 2016
	Earthquake Hits Hard in Ecuador and Social Media Responds Fast
April 19, 2016
	7 Ways to Optimize Your Website with WordPress
January 28, 2016
	Marketing Mindfulness for the New Millennials
October 20, 2015
	The Marketing Tool That Makes A Difference
September 29, 2015
Categories
Business
Case Studies
Covid-19
Marketing
Photography
Social Media
Technology
Uncategorized
Websites
Archives
April 2020
May 2016
April 2016
March 2016
February 2016
January 2016
October 2015
September 2015
February 2015
January 2015
November 2014
September 2014
August 2014
July 2014
May 2014
April 2014
March 2014
February 2014
October 2013
September 2013
Recent Posts
5 Digital Marketing Trends to Focus On During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Communicating With Clients During Covid-19
Creative Ways Businesses Are Responding to Covid-19
Digital Grants & Resources For Covid-19
Five SEO Strategies You Can Use When Sales Are Down
More About Us
About Us
Mission
Reviews
Team
How We Help
Process
Review Us
Free Resources
Blog
Our Services
Services
Web Design & Development
Digital Marketing
Virtual Marketing Department
Brand Growth
Remarketing
Strategy & Consulting
PPC Ads
Jersey City SEO
Get in Touch
Feel free to stop by, give us a call, or drop us a message.
Address:
285 West Side Avenue – Suite 191
Jersey City NJ, 07305
Phone number:

+866-642-4556

E-mail:

info@novofex.com

We are open at our Jersey City Location:

M-F  10 AM - 8 PM

Open 24/7 on novofex.com

Social links:
	
Copyright. 2019 Novofex.com
