Skip to main content
Skip to navigation
International edition
The Guardian - Back to home
Support the Guardian
Available for everyone, funded by readers
Contribute
Subscribe
Search jobs
Sign in
Search
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show
More
World
UK
Coronavirus
Climate crisis
Environment
Science
Global development
Football
Tech
Business
Obituaries
Mozilla
 This article is more than 7 years old
Mozilla CEO insists he won't resign over 'private' support for gay marriage ban
This article is more than 7 years old

Brendan Eich declines to discuss donation to campaign against gay marriage in California but says he will not resign

Mozilla CEO Brendan Eich has given his first interviews since his appointment. Photograph: Mozilla Photograph: Mozilla
James Ball in New York
@jamesrbuk
Wed 2 Apr 2014 16.29 BST

First published on Wed 2 Apr 2014 01.18 BST

520

The new CEO of Mozilla, the not-for-profit organisation behind the Firefox web browser, declined on Tuesday to offer a rationale for his 2008 donation in support of California's gay marriage ban, insisting he would remain in post despite a backlash over his appointment.


Giving interviews for the first time since he was announced as the new boss of Mozilla on 24 March, Brendan Eich repeatedly refused to be drawn on his stance on gay rights amid a widespread row over his $1,000 donation in support of the successful Proposition 8 ballot measure.

“So I don't want to talk about my personal beliefs because I kept them out of Mozilla all these 15 years we've been going,” he told the Guardian. “I don't believe they're relevant.”

The first week of Eich's tenure had been marked by a series of public statements by Mozilla staff protesting his appointment, the resignation of three of Mozilla's directors, and a denunciation from dating site OkCupid, which urged all Firefox users to change browsers.

Eich said OkCupid's move was “rash”, and was keen to downplay other moves since his appointment.

Though his stance on equal marriage had been made public through his donation, Eich said he did not believe it was relevant to his role at Mozilla, and said the organisation's own code of conduct precluded him discussing his views.

“I agree with people who say it wasn't private, but it was personal,” he said of the donation. “But the principle that I have operated by, that is formalised in our code of conduct at Mozilla, is it's really about keeping anything that's not central to our mission out of our office.

“If I stop doing that now I think I would be doing wrong that code of conduct and doing a disservice to Mozilla. And I really do think it's an important principle of inclusiveness for Mozilla to succeed.”

Mozilla is one of the champions of the open internet, including the principle of net neutrality – that all traffic should be treated equally, and as such the organisation is often held to progressive standards more than other online corporations. As an employer, Mozilla supports LGBT marriage and provides benefits to same-sex spouses.

Eich defined inclusiveness at Mozilla as leaving political issues upon which coders or community members might disagree out of the office.


“With the board of directors departures, two of them were already planning to depart … those are before any of the current news about me came out,” he said. “I would also say that OkCupid is a good example. I think there's a chance that we could actually turn that around. I think they acted a little rashly.

“I don't think they were aware of the statement [Mozilla foundation chair] Mitchell Baker made at the weekend [that] Mozilla as an organisation believes in LGBT equality, and I've heard from a lot of people that OkCupid had actually not been aware of that. So I think we can actually turn that around.”

Baker, chairwoman of the Mozilla Foundation, of which the Mozilla Corporation is a wholly-owned subsidiary, wrote in the 29 March blog post: "I want to speak clearly on behalf of both the Mozilla Corporation and the Mozilla Foundation: Mozilla supports equality for all, explicitly including LGBT equality and marriage equality."

Eich stressed that Baker's statement applied only to Mozilla as a corporation and foundation, rather than to its broader mission.


“There's a difference here between the company, the foundation, as an employer and an entity, versus the project and community at large, which is not under any constraints to agree on LGBT equality or any other thing that is not central to the mission or the Mozilla manifesto.”

Eich said the reason Mozilla as a community did not take a wider stance on issues such as LGBT marriage was the same as his reason for not explaining his donation: to avoid fragmenting its community. Without a large group of people who disagreed on lots of issues, Firefox would never have happened, he said.

“So far we've been able to bring people together of diverse beliefs including on things like marriage equality,” he said. “We couldn't have done this, we couldn't have done Firefox One. I would've been excluded, someone else would've been excluded because of me – I wouldn't have done that personally, they'd have just left. So imagine a world without Firefox: not good.”

Eich also stressed that Firefox worked globally, including in countries like Indonesia with “different opinions”, and LGBT marriage was “not considered universal human rights yet, and maybe they will be, but that's in the future, right now we're in a world where we have to be global to have effect”.

Proposition 8, a ballot measure that banned gay marriage in California, passed in November 2008. It was ruled unconstitutional by a federal court in 2010, but remained in force until the US supreme court upheld that decision in June last year.

Eich refused to be drawn on whether he would donate to a Proposition 8 style campaign again in the future. “I don't want to do hypotheticals,” he said. “I haven't thought about that issue and I really don't want to speculate because it's not relevant.”

He said he was keen to get on with the Mozilla CEO job in order to “unionise the users”, a mission he said would be difficult and require someone of his expertise – Eich wrote the JavaScript language which powers much of the internet – to fulfil.

“If you think about how networks evolve you get superpowers, Yahoo then Google, Facebook on social, and that can be a good thing,” he said. “But because they have network power, users have to go in there and put their data inside walled gardens. Mozilla as a browser has the potential to unionise our users, and if we do that we get collective bargaining rights over our data. That's one of the corners I think I can help us turn.

“I think I'm the best person for the job and I'm doing the job.”

Since you’re here …

… we have a small favour to ask. Millions are turning to the Guardian for open, independent, quality news every day, and readers in 180 countries, including Germany, now support us financially.

We believe everyone deserves access to information that’s grounded in science and truth, and analysis rooted in authority and integrity. That’s why we made a different choice: to keep our reporting open for all readers, regardless of where they live or what they can afford to pay. This means more people can be better informed, united, and inspired to take meaningful action.

In these perilous times, a truth-seeking global news organisation like the Guardian is essential. We have no shareholders or billionaire owner, meaning our journalism is free from commercial and political influence – this makes us different. When it’s never been more important, our independence allows us to fearlessly investigate, challenge and expose those in power.

We have enhanced our reputation for urgent, powerful reporting on the climate emergency, and moved to practice what we preach, rejecting advertising from fossil fuel companies, divesting from oil and gas companies and setting a course to achieve net zero emissions by 2030.

If there were ever a time to join us, it is now. Your funding powers our journalism, it protects our independence, and ensures we can remain open for all. You can support us through these challenging economic times and enable real-world impact.

Every contribution, however big or small, makes a real difference for our future. Support the Guardian from as little as €1 – and it only takes a minute. Thank you.

Support the Guardian
Topics
Mozilla
Firefox
Internet
Equal marriage
LGBT rights
news
Reuse this content
Most viewed
Solar storm confirms Vikings settled in North America exactly 1,000 years ago
Donald Trump to launch social media platform called Truth Social
China Evergrande shares fall sharply after $2.6bn asset sale collapses
UK strikes trade deal with New Zealand – but it may add nothing to GDP
Life after loneliness: ‘I was a single, isolated workaholic – until I learned to love my own company’
Related stories
Tech suffers from lack of humanities, says Mozilla head
12 Oct 2018
Mozilla 'presses pause' on Facebook ads over data-mining claims
22 Mar 2018
Firefox will replace Google with Yahoo as default search engine in US
20 Nov 2014
Mozilla confirms leak of 76,000 developer email addresses
5 Aug 2014
Mozilla still has three big problems – and now it needs a new CEO
4 Apr 2014
How can Mozilla turn a blind eye to its CEO's support of Prop 8 ?
27 Mar 2014
Brendan Eich's appointment as Mozilla CEO causes ripples across company
26 Mar 2014
Firefox maker Mozilla to launch smartphone operating system
22 Feb 2013
More from Headlines
EvergrandeShares fall sharply after $2.6bn asset sale collapses
24m ago
Climate crisisGlobal heating ‘may lead to epidemic of kidney disease’
3h ago
EnglandMinister denies there is a Covid ‘plan C’ to ban Christmas mixing
42m ago
SyriaAssad regime ‘siphons millions in aid’ by manipulating currency
4h ago
BrexitBritish leavers and remainers as polarised as ever, survey finds
2h ago
Norse AmericaSolar storm dating proves Vikings reached New World 1,000 years ago
12h ago
New ZealandUK strikes trade deal with country – but it may add nothing to GDP
11h ago
Donald TrumpFormer US president to launch social media platform called Truth Social
7h ago
Palm oilA fifth of Indonesia’s plantations lie in protected forests, says Greenpeace
5h ago
EgyptThief livestreams his face to thousands after snatching TV reporter's phone
4h ago
comments (520)
This discussion is now closed for comments but you can still sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion next time
Sort by
Oldest
Per page
100
Display threads
Collapsed
1
2
Displaying threads 1 to 100 of 133
OttoMaddox
2 Apr 2014 2:45
59

While I don't agree with Eich's stance, this whole campaign of trying to force him out because of a donation to a legal political campaign, which apparently had no bearing on how he did the job, really rubs me the wrong way.

Perhaps it's just easy for me to say that because I'm not LGBTQ, but the whole thing smacks of McCarthyism and I can't help feeling like a lot of people on the left are going to end up feeling the brunt of these kinds of tactics when the political wind changes.

Report
Anonymousdibs
      OttoMaddox
2 Apr 2014 2:52
33

His stance is akin to being pro-civil rights, but financially contributing to a campaign against interracial marriage, and then saying his difference of opinion should be tolerated as diversity.

Report
osprey1957
      OttoMaddox
2 Apr 2014 2:54
24

i'm not lgbtq, but this guy in charge of mozilla now that his stance of equality for all americans is known is rewarding someone for being unamerican, homophobic, and a lot of other ugly things. I contend that his stance DOES inform his actions as CEO and he should not be rewarded for it and Mozilla needs to understand that their user community won't tolerate intolerance.

It isn't mccarthyism in any way shape or form. To boycott a product for supporting discriminatory social issues is not the same thing as using the strength and might of the government to single out people and destroy their lives for their political beliefs.

Report
lollygagging
      osprey1957
2 Apr 2014 3:00
14

I contend that his stance DOES inform his actions as CEO

Well I'm not sure it does. From the article.

As an employer, Mozilla supports LGBT marriage and provides benefits to same-sex spouses.

Report
Show 44 more replies
folic86
2 Apr 2014 2:47
6

Can he explain why he thinks his marriage is threatened by allowing homosexual couples to marry? assuming of course he is married - can someone marry a bigot without any obvious redeeming features?

Report
User601725
      folic86
2 Apr 2014 3:05
37

Does it even matter? From what I see, he's been doing fine at his job. He has differing opinions from other people and ends it at that. He acknowledges Mozilla stands on differing grounds. Now let's grow up and move on.

Report
naughty8s
      folic86
2 Apr 2014 3:12
19

Why should he? What do Eichs views on gay marriage have to do with writing code?

Report
lollygagging
      folic86
2 Apr 2014 3:29
3

Can he explain why he thinks his marriage is threatened by allowing homosexual couples to marry?

I know how you feel. I don't understand it either. I've heard reasons such as wanting to maintain "traditional values" trotted out but what on earth does that actually mean? One man and one woman? Okay but why is that something better than a same sex relationship and why is the institute of marriage threatened by it? As I say, I don't understand it either.

The thing is though, that if this man is forced out of his job because of his fundamental religious beliefs then that seems to me to be a very similar form of discrimination. That's not something I feel we should be encouraging.

Report
Show 17 more replies
View more comments
Most popular
Most viewed
Across The Guardian
Most viewed
In Technology
Thief broadcasts his face to thousands after snatching journalist’s phone during live report
Solar storm confirms Vikings settled in North America exactly 1,000 years ago
British leavers and remainers as polarised as ever, survey finds
Deep within the UK’s shocking Covid data, there may be reasons for optimism
We need to stop buying stuff – and I know just the people to persuade us
Donald Trump to launch social media platform called Truth Social
Global heating ‘may lead to epidemic of kidney disease’
‘National treasure’: New Zealand Māori haka protected in trade deal with UK
Dune review – Denis Villeneuve’s awe-inspiring epic is a moment of triumph
Life after loneliness: ‘I was a single, isolated workaholic – until I learned to love my own company’
Most commented
The UK’s net zero strategy still avoids what is needed to avert climate catastrophe
Rebecca Newsom
Most shared
Solar storm confirms Vikings settled in North America exactly 1,000 years ago
World
UK
Coronavirus
Climate crisis
Environment
Science
Global development
Football
Tech
Business
Obituaries
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Contact us
Complaints & corrections
SecureDrop
Work for us
Privacy settings
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Terms & conditions
Help
All topics
All writers
Digital newspaper archive
Facebook
YouTube
Instagram
LinkedIn
Twitter
Newsletters
Advertise with us
Search UK jobs
Support the Guardian
Available for everyone, funded by readers
Contribute
Subscribe
Back to top
© 2021 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (modern)
